Thank you. Thank you, everyone, for taking the time to come, be together, near and far.
It's very special, very precious, so rejoicing in that. And as usual, just the heart of every
teaching, the root, the foundation of every experience we have, our motivation. So again,
just as always, part of our practice, in the beginning, just really connecting with our
motivations and these three vast, beautiful, powerful motivations that entail our complete
practice. And that's why we begin with that. So our joy, our appreciation for this precious
moment we have, and this precious life, all the things we're free of, all the situations
we have, all the good outer and inner conditions, especially related to exploring and bringing
out our own innate goodness and sanity and realness. And then our great devotion and
purity vision of the sacred nature of this moment, this experience, reflecting on the
three vatras, all form and appearances as the enlightened display, all sound and movement,
enlightened speech of mantra, all space and awareness and thought, the vast expanse of
pure mind. And then in all this great fortune, we've had this opportunity to come together
and practice. And as usual, we're going to continue with a little bit of reflecting.
We're all practicing together and studying and practicing. So I wanted to get back, you
know, we've really encouraging a little bit of discourse. It'd be nice if we were all
in the same room, but we're not. So we do have communication. So do have a couple questions
that are just good questions. And this is both particularly within our bodhicitta practice.
So of course, within our Nundro practice, bodhicitta is so essential. It's this, you
know, the second main frame that we spend time meditating with. And like Dojo Mepeshe,
it's the root of the whole path, arousing our bodhicitta intention. The whole path is
all within bodhicitta. So maybe I'll ask, I'll just kind of put forth the questions that
are here and then kind of come back and reflect to that. But again, just keeping in mind that
bodhicitta, again, it's not its own little separate section, just like none of the sections
of our Nundro practice are solely just their, their aspects and atmospheres and qualities
that pervade every aspect of all the sections of Nundro, which means all the practices will
ever do, whose aim is what? To recognize things as they are, to remove our obscurations and
their causes and bring out innate wisdom, compassion, love, kindness, uncontrived, genuine
love, wisdom, compassion, beauty, which is bodhicitta. So it's the root, which means it's
also the sprouts, the branches, the leaves and the fruits, and not just one fruit, but
millions and billions of fruits. There's so many praises to the qualities of bodhicitta,
because again, it is our, ultimately our innate nature, our own Buddha nature is bodhicitta
realized. So I'm going to get to the question here. So this is particularly, this is from
Julie wrote, I think maybe from one of the last sessions and during the bodhicitta session,
of course, the prayer that we're saying is our, our bodhisattva vow, kind of renewing
in every section, restoring our bodhicitta motivation and inspiration. And so that is
right from now until samsara becomes empty, I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness
of all sentient parent beings. And so then Julie was asking, the phrase until samsara
becomes empty, doesn't really mean empty, like a movie theater after the show is over,
does it? Or is it more like we sometimes see the view defined, the perfect equality of
samsara and nirvana? So that's the first question around the first line. And then the second
line, I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings is
also very puzzling for me. Although I had probably heard about things being insubstantial
many times I only understood this in connection to sentient beings. When I read Dojumlinpa's
account of his dream in which Longchenpa convinced him that sentient beings with their own
individual
mind streams did not exist. A disturbing and almost terrifying idea. So I don't really
know how to understand or even attempt to accomplish this thing. And also isn't there
an eye to accomplish another sticking point? So yeah, I think the point is, is that's exactly
where we're stuck. With I, right, the source of all suffering, the first noble truth and
second noble truth is as long as we have our basic ignorance and ego clinging and engage
with negative emotions instantly that brings up the whole fruit of our samsara experience.
So definitely working with investigating our concept of "I" is so vital, so important,
so really important. And that is the path within our practice. I think we practice the
unity of the three yanas, the Theravadin, the foundational Buddhism, Mahayana, and an extension
of that, the Vajrayana. And it seems worth just kind of remembering too, sometimes we
hear Mahayana, and of course that's I think we've all heard it. Mahayana is in relation
to foundational Buddhism or Hinayana, which is sometimes called the lesser vehicle. But
that's in no way like a diminutive statement. I think sometimes it's also maybe like the
smaller, more narrow view, the narrow viewed vehicle, you know, a smaller, but it's just
like all the teachings of the Buddha. Until we ourselves have more realization and stability
and knowledge, we're not going to be really of much help to anybody, not ourselves, not
anyone. So within the Hinayana, right, the focus there is self-liberation, which is very
practical again for that reason. Unless we ourselves are going to work on ourselves,
we're the only ones who can free ourselves. And so we take that responsibility for our
own freedom. And then of course, on then other levels, kind of the fruition, we're also exploring
the emptiness of I, of self. And that fruition is like the state of like in our heart, where
we're free of, you know, our negative emotions and creating more negative emotions. We've
directly perceiving the illusory nature of this conglomeration of interdependence that
we call me or I. And then, but it doesn't stop there, we continue and that's where Mahayana
comes in, where our focus isn't just taking responsibility for our own liberation, but
with a heart of love and compassion and caring and wisdom of seeing how open the situation
is, we take the responsibility to free all beings from suffering and its causes, to give
them the means so the focus is wider. And we're also taking everything onto the path,
we're not excluding anything from the path of purifying and awakening. And then the fruit
is Buddhahood through all the paths and the bhoomis. So from now, and again, until attaining
the heart, until samsara becomes empty, I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness
of all sentient parent beings. So it is, is so rich, these lines of, and I think one really
helpful way, at least to relate to everything, is if we remember the two truths, there's
relative truth, there's absolute truth. There's the, what's the word remember, Shay used it
a lot during the teachings, as far as in the Buddhist teachings, there's kind of preliminary,
there's definitive meaning, provisional, there's provisional meanings, and then there's absolute
meanings. And as we've all heard many times with our bodhicitta practice, we're engaging in
awakening
our absolute bodhicitta realization, again, for the benefit of all beings. And we do that through
the skillful means of accumulating merit and purify up uprooting our ego clinging through
our, as per our relative bodhicitta, which is, you know, really connecting again and again with
the four boundless and actualizing our, our wish for enlightenment, for the benefit of all beings
through the six paramita practices, right? But then just looking at these lines until samsara
becomes empty, from now until samsara becomes empty. We have, we can have this big view of,
we're in the meditation, we're here before Gurumpushe and all the, all seeing, all knowing,
all loving wisdom of all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas are right with us taking witness of us
and our inspiration and our aspiration and our joy and our commitment and our humbleness
of like caring for this supreme wish.
And we have, you know, the five paths,
which is the way the Buddha mapped out the path to enlightenment.
When we first meet the teachings, the accumulation path, the path, and then we,
we connect with our meditation and our practice and study. And then we progress into the joining,
the bridge of actually beginning to have realization of what's at the, what the Buddha is pointing
us
towards. And then the path of seeing where we actually see directly and unmistakably the open,
empty nature of ourself and all phenomena. And then the path of meditation is the continued
purification through then what's called the ten boomies of the bodhisattvas
until the path of no more learning of our Buddhahood. And so obviously we don't have time
to go through those, but it's really helpful to look at the descriptions of the five paths
and the ten boomies, at least their names and a little bit of their qualities. And I know in
Rinpoche's book, Door to Inconceivable Wisdom and Compassion, there's a chapter, I think the last
chapter is on the five paths and also Rinpoche's very briefly go over the ten boomies. And is it
also in a more recent book too, going over the five paths and ten boomies?
It must be, I think in one of the newer, the books of like walking in the footsteps.
I think, but anyway, it's definitely here. And it's, I'm sure lots of other places do.
But that's a big view. But the important part is from now, no matter where we're at,
no matter what we've done, good or bad, helpful or not, no matter what our degree of realization,
we have the precious bodhicitta. From beginningless time, we and all sentient beings have been
wandering, all wanting happiness, but doing all the things that lead us further away from it
due to our ignorance, and being caught up in our hopes and fears,
and just creating more and more obscurations. Like it said, from now until attaining enlightenment,
until samsara becomes empty. So yes, we need to recognize empty. So I think there's a metaphor
here of yes, on one level, it is like a metaphor of the opera house being empty.
All the players have gone home, all the audience has dispersed, or, you know,
but definitely the deeper meaning is until samsara becomes empty. So
we need to accumulate, you know, achieve the two benefits, we need to benefit before we can
benefit anyone benefit ourselves through having that wisdom of seeing the emptiness of ourselves
and others, and all these skillful means practices we have that help us get there through
intellectual
analysis, and heart practice, and all these skillful means practices we have also with our
rajrayana practices. And then with that, naturally comes our, not only our compassion and our love
being more open and vast, but actually more informed, and more beneficial. And through
that compassion and love, we are helping others to also recognize the inseparability of samsara
nirvana to recognize, which is what the border is our own mind, that vast openness.
There's also, you know, that very famous story of Chenrezig, of Thousand Arm Chenrezig,
how like as a bodhisattva, Chenrezig did many beneficial activities that
emptied, emptied samsara, but then before you knew it,
it's full again of sentient beings and just that heart wrenching quality. And then I said that
through that, you know, he really broke up. But obviously, he continued. So the point,
I guess the main point I'm getting at is, like it said in the sutras, as we could sit,
there's no way we could measure space.
It's infinite. It's without limit. It's inconceivably vast openness is space. And within
space, as far as there's space, the Buddha said, the omniscient ones, the knowing ones,
there are sentient beings. And sentient beings are there. The only difference between sentient
being and fully enlightened Buddha is the recognition and realization of their innate nature
in different degrees.
And we are, and, you know, of course, may we all realize it. And truly,
that's why it's so important we practice and meditate, shamatha meditation,
develop our concentration, develop our insight and our intellectual capacity to investigate
our reality and settle and practice.
Because then we aren't tricked by the display, because I think that's the important point here,
right, is, and it's very important in the bodhisattva motivation, there is no end line.
The only end is, you know, our own samsara, and then as each being recognizes their true
nature and purifies, then their samsara ceases. But it's endless, it's vast, and it's all open
and empty of being anything solid or permanent or independent.
So it's big, vast view. We've all heard again and again, but really bringing it to heart
into our practice from where we are is so important.
So yeah, we're just as real as the Buddhas, and we shouldn't confuse,
I don't know in the second question here, we're all dream beings, we're all illusory beings.
And when we're less than, and others are more important than ourselves,
and we see how open the situation is, then we're good. But we shouldn't, I mean,
not to confuse the relative truth that as long as we don't recognize the nature, we all have our
samsara experiences. And we're not kind of establishing a nihilist view that nothing
matters, or I don't exist, so why do anything, or people's pain isn't real, so what, you know,
I think we all know we're saying that, but for on the relative level, we experience things.
On the ultimate level, we don't have any difference. So I think the other thing I wanted to get at
was
what are some really points, you know, we've talked again about how important our motivation is,
that is arousing the way bodhicitta is defined is, may I attain enlightenment in order to benefit
all sentient parent beings. And in the Mahayana teachings are also that motivation and that
is so prime and so vital, because that is how the nature acts in an uncontrived way.
And also with that are the great the teachings on the nature the Buddha gave of great emptiness.
So definitely, that's another great book to read, if you haven't is Kenshin Palden,
Rinpoche and Kenpo Seong Rinpoche's book on the heart sutra, which so clearly goes through this
profound teaching on great emptiness, but also in a way also shows us, you know, the first turning,
second turning, and then base for the third turning of the Buddhist teachings.
So then, here we are, from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, we take refuge in the
three jewels, whose soul embodiment is the precious Lama, our precious teacher. And before
our precious teachers and all the noble ones, you know, we make the commitment until samsara is
empty, until all beings recognize the vast openness. Until I, I'm going to keep going,
unfolding awakening in order to truly be a benefit to all beings to recognize their innate freedom.
And I'll work for the benefit of all sentient parent beings. And what is that benefit? It
is awakening, awakening bodhicitta, acting bodhicitta. So then within our, our, our tradition,
and our lineage, which of course, it all comes through Buddha Shakyamuni, the great kindness
teacher in this fortunate age, who we're all connected to, who was a great bodhisattva,
and fully enlightened Buddha, now living. And then there's also these other great bodhisattvas,
still existing. So our lineage of taking the bodhisattva vows in this world, in our living lineage,
is coming from, of course, Buddha Shakyamuni. And then there's called what's the profound
bodhisattva lineage, and profound.
That's coming from bodhisattva Manjushri. And from Manjushri came to Nagarjuna. And Nagarjuna
came down to Shantarakshita. And then of course, Shantarakshita came to Tibet and was
held and brought down into Tibet. And then also the other profound lineage is coming into this
world again, Buddha Shakyamuni. And then from the great bodhisattva Maitreya to Asanga in India.
And then one of Asanga students in the bodhicitta trainings and teachings was Atisha. And then
Atisha came to Tibet. So Shantarakshita, Atisha to Tibet, coming down that rich tradition to Longch
ampa.
And then Longchampa gave those teachings to the great teacher Mindling Turchin,
the great Mindling Turchin of Mindrilling monastery, which was such a renowned,
powerful practice lineage and study practice going there.
Doloch and Dharmashri came down eventually to again, His Holiness, Dudram and Pashay.
And then to our precious Kenchampald and Sharab and Pashay, and Kenpo Samondang and Pashay.
So in any case, that's there. And then when we take our bodhisattva vow, we're doing that in
our nundra in this section, every time renewing it. But then I just thought I'll stop talking soon,
but just some basic points that are helpful for remembering with our bodhisattva training.
Because again, our bodhi, all our nundra practice and our bodhi,
our nundra practice and our bodhicitta practice, of course, we're touching home base.
We're doing the meditation on our cushion. But the point is to bring out that quality,
those atmosphere, that view, and let our conduct follow with that, like wherever we go,
on the cushion, off the cushion, formal practice, informal meditation, post meditation.
And so the conduct of the bodhisattvas is, of course, always based on the four boundless,
connecting with the aspirational relative bodhicitta of the four boundless.
And then based on that, we have what's called the three moralities
of the bodhisattvas that we can check in with, just as really simple guideposts.
And that's like the morality of avoiding negative
actions and engaging in positive actions, before negativities and engaging with them.
And then there's the morality that go that gathers all
all good things. And then there's the morality that is actually
performing beneficial activities for beings. So again, the four negativities are classically
brought up into, we're avoiding things, we're just, we're not going to lie.
Of course, there's many other precepts we're going by. And I'll just add, we're not going to lie.
And in particular, we're not going to use our speech to deceive anyone, but particularly
our teachers, our elders, those who we truly honor.
So we're not going to deceive, deceive. And what are we going to do? We're going to act,
we're going to speak truthfully, truthfully to everyone. But then again, especially those we
honor, those who have helped us, our elders, our teachers, the noble ones. And then we're not going
to make people feel regretful. There's no need to guilt trip anybody. Instead, we're going to
encourage ourselves, encourage each other in meaningful ways, even in working with our
challenges, especially in working with our challenges. And we're not going to criticize
if we fall into being criticizing and talking shade about, you know, anyone, but especially
sincere practitioners and noble beings. And if someone hears that, or they hear it,
we've broken it if we've. And then the fourth thing we're going to avoid is our cunning
ego tricks of really kind of in a cunning way, manipulating others in order to kind of get our,
you know, less savory agendas taken care of. And so we're going to avoid that, then we're going to
engage in just honest compassion and uncontried, no agenda giving according to how we can.
And then the second morality, morality that gathers all virtues. That's essentially,
again, looking more at the actualizing practices. When we actually are practicing, meditating,
studying, meditating, practicing. And then again, within the frame of our bodhicattva training,
training in the six paramitas, actualizing our bodhicitta,
uprooting our ego clinging, increasing our wisdom, bringing out our good qualities
and beneficial qualities. And then there's actually the action of doing beneficial activities
besides the beneficial activities of our own study, contemplation and practice.
The practice of just doing beneficial things. And the four, I think four guidelines around
doing beneficial things we can look at is be generous, give what we can. If someone needs
something and it's something we can give, then we give again, give without any need for getting
anything back or any sense of outcome. And then in our verbal activities, speaking meaningfully
and gently and respectfully, kindly, you know, and as much as we can be aware of
especially sensitive spots with people, then that's another. So speaking meaningfully, kindly,
and then we also want to always act within our own capacities. We want to be skillful in our
activities. We want to be kind of really aware of what's within our capacity to give and do.
But also it's equally and really important too, to develop our abilities, to be aware of
and giving to people what they actually need and according to their readiness and their capacities
on whatever level. That's a very important training. I think we've all experienced
different fumblings with that, you know. And then the fourth is just being an ordinary
person, being equal, recognizing we're all in the same boat.
They all have the same beautiful nature and we're all, at least I'm an ordinary being.
So just that, just kind of just being straightforward, open, honest, equal, you know,
not taking a higher than thou attitude or a lower than thou attitude necessarily,
but walking our talk, you know, actually having our actions really reflect our true motivation
and vice versa. So that's that. And then of course, as I've said this, I'm thinking how,
I wouldn't call it quite hypocritical, but we all have a long way to go. You know, I certainly do.
And because we are, I am a sentient being, just at the very beginning of the path,
that means I have lots of obscurations and lots of habitual patterns that
do create more trouble for myself and others. So here we are. And when we make this really
big commitment before all the noble ones, and we do have downfalls where we do,
due to different reasons, make mistakes and fall into our negative habitual patterns,
get caught up in our sneaky ego tricks, you know, as soon as we become aware of that,
then we purify and restore our vows. And that's why it's so good to, as much as we can,
restore our bodhicitta motivation, our joy and appreciation, our devotion with all of that.
And that can be done, of course, within our nundra practice. In a way, we're doing that
in our bodhisattva section. And then definitely we can be purifying our bodhisattva downfalls
during our Vadrasattva practice, for sure. And then if we want to do additionally to that,
we have also every 10th day when we have our ganachakra ceremony, the stainless king and the
Vadrasattva practice we do there, that's definitely purifying. It's purifying all the mistakes and
downfalls we've had in every level of our training, in our pratimoksha training, our bodhisattva
training, our Vajrayana training, and the vows and commitments we've, we're refreshing and
correcting any kind of misuse we've had. And we want to maintain that all as much as we can,
being mindful, alert, conscientious. So I really should stop talking.
I hope that was helpful. There's so much to say around bodhichitta. One thing I'm going to
recommend another really good book around bodhichitta. It's a really beautiful,
beautiful book, so inspiring. It's like, what is bodhichitta? How big is bodhichitta?
It's vast as the heavens, deep as the sea. But this book, it's published by Wisdom.
It's by great, really great, so precious master of, you know, the last century, Kunurumpashe.
It has a biography of him. This is his verses in praise of bodhichitta. And it's just so,
so beautiful. It has the Tibetan and in a beautiful translation. It just goes on and on and on,
praising bodhichitta. It's so vast. But also Kunurumpashe was not only this totally sublime,
realized meditation master, Vajrayana master. He was so scholarly. And so it's the kind of praise
and beauty you read. And it's telling us about the path and it gets you curious like, Oh, what is
this?
So anyway, let's keep our bodhichitta. And I opened up this randomly, this famous quote he
brings out about the qualities of bodhichitta. No matter where we are now, no matter again,
keeping that motivation and that aspiration and doing everything we can to protect and nurture
that is so important. So even if a diamond is broken, it does not stop being called a diamond.
Similarly, even flashes of bodhichitta do not stop being called bodhichitta.
It's a beautiful book, vast as the heavens, deep as the sea by Kunurumpashe.
So thank you for sitting through that. I hope it's helpful. And please, I know someone else wrote
too. I kind of addressed some questions you put there. I think that was from Kristin wrote too,
asking some questions so that, you know, I'll try to get in touch with both Julie and Kristin,
but I thought addressing some answers here and then we can talk more in person too.
So thank you. We'll do our No-Draw practice now. Thank you.